---
title: "Dead-letter Station (DLS)"
description:
  "This section describes the implementation of the Dead-letter station in
  Memphis."
---

## Introduction

Dead-letter station will often be named "Dead-letter queue" in other messaging
systems.

Dead-letter station (=queue) is both a concept and a solution that is useful for
debugging clients because it lets you isolate and "recycle" instead of drop
unconsumed messages to determine why their processing doesn't succeed.

Upon creation of a Memphis station, a dead-letter station will be created by
default since it does not consume any resources or storage unless there are
messages.

Once the user has debugged the consumer application or the consumer application
is available to consume the message, a retransmit can take place directly from
the dead-letter station according in the following methods

- Move the messages back to the source station with just a click of a button on
  the Memphis GUI

- Retransmit the message directly to the unconsumed consumer

- Consume the message directly through the SDK from any consumer

- Drop the message from the Dead-letter station

## Terminology

**Poison messages** \= Messages that cause a consumer group to repeatedly
require a delivery (possibly due to a consumer failure) such that the message is
never processed completely and acknowledged so that it can be stopped being sent
again to the same consumer.

**Example**: Some message on an arbitrary station pulled by a consumer of a
certain consumer group. That consumer, for some reason, doesn't succeed in
handling it. It can be due to a bug, an unknown schema, a resource issue, etcâ€¦

## How do dead-letter stations work?

Sometimes, messages can't be processed because of various possible issues, such
as erroneous conditions within the producer or consumer application, bad schema,
or an unexpected state change that causes an issue with your application code.
For example, if a user places a web order with a particular product ID, but the
product ID is deleted, the web store's code fails and displays an error, and the
message with the order request is sent to a dead-letter queue.

Occasionally, producers and consumers might fail to interpret aspects of the
protocol that they use to communicate, causing message corruption or loss. Also,
the consumer's hardware errors might corrupt the message payload or break the
consumer itself.

A message will be flagged as "Poison" and sent to the dead-letter station **when
passing the** `**maxAckDeliveries**` **value.**

`maxAckDeliveries` is the parameter that defines how many times the broker will
try to redeliver the same message to the same CG until receiving an "Ack."

<Frame>![](/images/dls.jpeg)</Frame>

## Types of messages

The DLS will automatically (based on user decision) catch messages of the
following types -

- **Unacknowledged**. Messages that passed the `maxAckDeliveries` parameter.

- **Schema violation.** Messages that did not pass the attached schema
  validation. As Memphis mission is to narrow data loss, and increase
  observability, messages that did not pass schema validation can be important
  and indicate some producer issues. Therefore, Memphis supports storing such
  messages.

<Frame>
  ![](/memphis/concepts/images/Screen-20Shot-202023-01-07-20at-2021.10.04.png)
</Frame>

<Frame>![](/memphis/concepts/images/schemaverse.jpeg)</Frame>

How "Schema violation" messages reach DLS

### How to recover (=resend) a DLS message

Message recovery or "resend" does not require any code change or downtime to the
consumers. Memphis will push the message over the same "station connection."

Every type of stored DLS message has a unique recovery strategy.

- For **"Unacknowledged"** message - The message will be resent directly to the
  unacknowledged consumer group/s. Traditional message brokers usually reproduce
  the message back to the queue, but that behavior will produce an already ACK
  message to all of the consumer groups, both the ones that ACK the message and
  those who do not and can bring duplicate processing. Memphis implemented a
  mechanism to resend the message only to unacknowledged consumer groups to
  avoid such a scenario.

- For "**Schema violation**" message - Observability only. Resend is currently
  not available. Future releases will enable the user to change the schema if
  needed and push the message back to the station as it did not consume by any
  CG.

### Message Journey

<Frame>![](/memphis/concepts/images/3.jpg)</Frame>

Message Journey

After clicking on "Message Journey," the user will be redirected to this screen
which is in the context of a single message.

**Left panel -** The producer of the message

**Center panel -** The message and its metadata.

**Right panel -** the unacknowledged consumer groups.
