---
title: "Failover Scenarios"
---

## Introduction

This section describes the exact behavior of Memphis in different failure
scenarios based on three parameters:

- Ability to read

- Ability to write

- Potential data loss

This section also aims to educate and explain Memphis's cluster mode's internals
so its users can make design decisions that suit their workloads perfectly.

## Initial state

The test environment is based on a station with **three replicas** (mirrors)
over **three memphis brokers** in cluster mode.

(\*) The small circle within the brokers emphasizes if they are a
["Leader" or "Follower."](/memphis/concepts/station#leaders-and-followers)

![](/images/initial%20state.jpeg)

## Scenarios

### 1\. Memphis brokers

Single broker failure, leader or follower. Produce / Consume is working usually.
No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%201.jpeg)

Broker 2 is down

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%202.jpeg)

Broker 3 is down

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%203.jpeg)

Broker (Leader) 1 is down

Two out of three replicas/brokers are down. Produce/Consume will be stopped
until at least one replica/follower is available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%204.jpeg)

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%205.jpeg)

The entire cluster is down.

Produce/Consume will be stopped until at least one leader and replica/follower
are available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/broker%206.jpeg)

### 2\. Kubernetes Workers

The kubernetes worker that holds one of the "followers" is down. The cluster
will wait for the broker to be "Ready." Produce / Consume is working usually. No
data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%201.jpeg)

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%202.jpeg)

The kubernetes worker that holds the "leader" is down. The "leader" role has
been taken over by broker 2\. Producers / Consumers will might require a
reconnect. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%203.jpeg)

The kubernetes workers that hold the "followers"/"Leader and a follower" are
down. No quorum for stream. No cluster leader. The station is temporarily
unavailable. Produce/Consume will be stopped until at least one replica/follower
is available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%204.jpeg)

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%205.jpeg)

The Kubernetes cluster is down; therefore, the Memphis cluster is down.

Produce/Consume will be stopped until at least one leader and replica/follower
are available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/k8s%206.jpeg)

### 3\. Kubernetes volumes (PVC)

One of the K8S worker's PVs owned by one of the followers is down.

The affected broker and PV require a manual restart.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv1.jpeg)

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv2.jpeg)

The leader's volume is down. Data may not be available during the new leader
election process. Producing messages is suspended until a new leader is elected.
The affected broker and PV require a manual restart.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv3.jpeg)

Both followers' volumes are down. No quorum for stream. No cluster leader. The
station is temporarily unavailable. Produce/Consume will be stopped until at
least one replica/follower is available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv4.jpeg)

Both leader and follower volumes are down. No quorum for stream. No cluster
leader. The station is temporarily unavailable. Produce/Consume will be stopped
until at least one replica/follower is available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv5.jpeg)

All volumes are down; therefore, the Memphis cluster is down.

Produce/Consume will be stopped until at least one leader and replica/follower
are available. No data loss.

![](/memphis/concepts/images/pv6.jpeg)
